In the early days, when 20–30 minutes was still hard for me, I mostly rode with Ally Love. She’s all positivity about life, body and fitness. She encourages you, smiles, tells stories, tells you that you can achieve anything. So when I start a ride, even if I’m tired or don’t feel like working out or have had a tough week I can’t help but feeling better on the ride and afterwards. Peloton lifted my mental spirits in 2019/2020 through what were two emotionally draining years in the world (fires, protests, politics, he who shall not be named, etc). Ally Love and riding became my happy place. It was inspiring. Having a positive mental outlook helped me perform better.
As I got more advanced in my riding I started doing longer rides and found a “Power Zone” program (I will explain this in a future post on exercise) with Matt Wilpers. I start a long ride (60-90 minute) with a sense of dread thinking “I am REALLY not up for this today.” If I were just on a random stationary bike on my own I might not push myself hard that given day or I might quit early. But Matt mentally gets you through your warm up, lays out the interval schedule we will ride in advance and lays out a plan for how to attack the time we have together. Matt reminds you throughout the ride to check your form, not be inefficient on form and how to the most out of yourself and your mind.
He’ll say things like “I can’t do the workout for you. YOU’RE the person who turned up on a Saturday morning to this ride. You got this! Stick with it. I’m just your guide but you’re going to feel great when this is over. Make sure your hips are straight, your knees are aligned and your feet are pointing forward.” Suddenly I look at the screen and 45 minutes have passed. He then reminds me, “You didn’t turn up for a 60-minute ride only to give up in the final few minutes. This is when all the good stuff happens! This is when you’re going to get the benefit from the hard work you already put in.”
It’s amazing what mental coaching can do for a workout. “A calm mind is a calm heart and calm muscles. Free your mind. Free your body. The rest will come easier.”